%% Helpfile for Freeciv 1.7.x
%%
%% The number of spaces after the "#" indicates nesting level when
%% displayed in the online help.
%%
%% Categories are: TEXT, UNIT, IMPROVEMENT, WONDER, TECH
%% All nodes are "text" nodes except those between markers such as:
%% @START_TECHS, @END_TECHS.  There should be one such section for
%% each category: TECHS, UNITS, WONDERS, IMPROVEMENTS.
%% Within each category, any game item which doesn't appear here
%% will be generated, and any item here which doesn't match a game
%% item will be excluded.
%%
%% Notice! no line may be more than 68 chars wide: --------------->|
%%
#About
Freeciv is a turn-based strategy game, in which each player becomes
the leader of a civilization, fighting to obtain the ultimate goal:
The extinction of all other civilizations.

  Original authors:
    (they are no longer involved, please don't mail them!)
            Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg - allan@daimi.aau.dk
            Claus Leth Gregersen - leth@daimi.aau.dk
            Peter Joachim Unold  - pjunold@daimi.aau.dk

  Present administrators:
             Nicolas Brunel      - brunel@ham.esil.univ-mrs.fr
             David Pfitzner      - dwp@mso.anu.edu.au

If you find any bugs, then please send us a bug report.  You can
either email the present administrators (listed above), or the
Freeciv developers mailing list.  Details about Freeciv mailing
lists, as well as helpful details on submitting bug reports, the
Freeciv FAQ, and more, can be found on the Freeciv website, at:

  http://www.freeciv.org
---
#Copying

Freeciv is covered by the GPL, which is included here:

                   GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                      Version 2, June 1991

 Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
             59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                             Preamble

  The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change
free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.
This General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit
to using it.  (Some other Free Software Foundation software is
covered by the GNU Library General Public License instead.)  You can
apply it to your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that
you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and
charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code
or can get it if you want it, that you can change the software or
use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you know you can do
these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the
rights.  These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities
for you if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify
it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights
that you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can
get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software,
and (2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to
copy, distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make
certain that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this
free software.  If the software is modified by someone else and
passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not
the original, so that any problems introduced by others will not
reflect on the original authors' reputations.

  Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making
the program proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear
that any patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not
licensed at all.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
   TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

  0. This License applies to any program or other work which
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be
distributed under the terms of this General Public License.  The
"Program", below, refers to any such program or work, and a "work
based on the Program" means either the Program or any derivative
work under copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the
Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications
and/or translated into another language.  (Hereinafter, translation
is included without limitation in the term "modification".)  Each
licensee is addressed as "you".

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the
Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on
the Program (independent of having been made by running the
Program).  Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any
warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of
this License along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy,
and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for
a fee.

  2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any
portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy
and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section
1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

    a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
    stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

    b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that
    in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or
    any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all
    third parties under the terms of this License.

    c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
    when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
    interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
    announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
    notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you
    provide a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program
    under these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy
    of this License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is
    interactive but does not normally print such an announcement,
    your work based on the Program is not required to print an
    announcement.)

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work
based on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the
terms of this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend
to the entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of
who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or
contest your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the
intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of
derivative or collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the
Program with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a
volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other
work under the scope of this License.

  3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms
of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the
following:

    a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
    source code, which must be distributed under the terms of
    Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software
    interchange; or,

    b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
    years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
    cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
    machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
    distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a
    medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

    c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the
    offer to distribute corresponding source code.  (This
    alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution and
    only if you received the program in object code or executable
    form with such an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as
a special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

  4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this
License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from
you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so
long as such parties remain in full compliance.

  5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

  6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on
the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from
the original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program
subject to these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any
further restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights
granted herein.  You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by
third parties to this License.

  7. If, as a consequence of a court judgement or allegation of
patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent
issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order,
agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this
License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License.
If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your
obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations,
then as a consequence you may not distribute the Program at all.
For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free
redistribution of the Program by all those who receive copies
directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you could
satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from
distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable
under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is
intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in
other circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is
willing to distribute software through any other system and a
licensee cannot impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed
to be a consequence of the rest of this License.

  8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces,
the original copyright holder who places the Program under this
License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation
excluding those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in
or among countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License
incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this
License.

  9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
versions of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the
Program specifies a version number of this License which applies to
it and "any later version", you have the option of following the
terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation.  If the Program does not
specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version
ever published by the Free Software Foundation.

  10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other
free programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to
the author to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted
by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software
Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this.  Our decision
will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status of all
derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and
reuse of software generally.

                            NO WARRANTY

  11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.
EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR
OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE
DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR
CORRECTION.

  12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY
AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE
PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING
RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A
FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF
SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGES.

                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
                         ------------------
---
#Controls
Mouse:
======
  Left-click:  (on city):  Pop up city window
               (on unit):  Activate unit
  Center-click or
     Control-right-click:  Show tile info
  Right-click:             Center tile in view
  Shift-click:             Adjust city workers from main map

Keyboard:
=========
  a: (A)uto-settler                     arrow keys: Move unit
  A: (A)uto-attack (military units)          space: Unit stay put
  c: (C)enter view on unit                  return: Turn done
  b: (B)uild City
  B: Help (B)uild Wonder
  D: (D)isband unit
  f: (F)ortify unit
  F: Build (F)ortress on tile
  g: Unit (G)oto (then left-click mouse to select destination)
  h: Change (H)omecity (to city at current location)
  i: (I)rrigate tile
  l: Go/air(l)ift to city
  m: (M)ine tile
  o: transf(o)rm terrain
  p: clean (p)ollution
  P: (P)illage tile
  r: Build (r)oad/railroad
  R: Establish trade(R)oute
  s: (S)entry unit
  u: (U)nload boat
  w: (W)ait until later in turn
  W: (W)akeup sentried units on tile
  t: Show (T)iles city is using (mouse over or near city)
  x: auto-e(X)plore
---
#Strategy and tactics
While every game is different, there's a basic strategy which most
players follow, especially at the start of the game.

These steps may vary depending upon the server options, but in
general, the steps are:

 0. Choosing the first city site.
 1. Mapping the countryside.
 2. Defending the cities.
 3. Units to build first.
 4. Agriculture improvements.

 5. Where to build?
 6. Taking care of cities.
 7. Exploring the world.
 8. Things to keep in mind.
 9. Make your own strategy for the game.
10. Interacting with other players (Diplomacy).


 0. Choosing the first city site.

    Start the game by wandering around BRIEFLY to find a good place
    to build the first city.  Don't feel tempted to investigate any
    yellow-roofed villages yet - they might contain barbarian
    tribes.  Build the city close to resources and perhaps close to
    the sea.  Keep in mind that the city you build first will be
    your capital!  The idea is to balance the time spent looking for
    a good site, against getting your first city established as
    early as possible.

 1. Mapping the countryside.

    After the capital city has been founded, it will start producing
    a warrior unit.  These units can be used to rove around
    exploring the countryside.  Remember, it is risky to leave a
    city undefended, so perhaps keep the first warrior in the city,
    and use the following one to explore.  If you started the game
    with an explorer unit, use that to explore, obviously!

 2. Defending the cities.

    At this point, defend your cities by always leaving a warrior
    unit in them.  As your civilization develops units with a
    greater defence strength, replace the obsolete units with new
    ones to ensure your cities have maximum defence.  The units most
    often used for defence are (in order of strength):  Warrior,
    Phalanx, Pikemen, Musketeers, and Riflemen.

    Keep in mind that with some types of government, military units
    inside or outside cities can create or reduce unhappiness.
    Also remember that when a unit is inside a city, it gets a 50%
    defensive bonus, as if fortified.  When a new city is built,
    the city starts to build the best available defensive unit from
    the above list.

 3. Units to build first.

    After building one or two Warrior units, start building
    Settlers.  The second Settler can be used to build roads and
    irrigate the farmland close to the city, and the third can be
    used to build a new city.  Or, you can use the second Settler to
    build another city, and use the third Settler for agricultural
    improvements in the farmland around the cities.  Keep in mind
    that a large population increases both the amount of
    productivity and your civilization's research rate.

 4. Agriculture improvements.

    Each city has an area of farmland around it that can be used
    for growing food, producing goods, and generating trade.  This
    can be increased by using Settlers to improve the farmland.
    The land can be improved with roads, irrigation, mines, and
    others.


 5. Where to build cities?

    The best location for a city is a matter of taste.  A city which
    is placed near the sea is easier to spot by opponents, but can
    also serve as a port for sea-going units.  (They also usually
    need a coastal defence later on).  The best strategy is to build
    a few of both, but keep in mind that your opponents will find it
    harder to locate your city if you don't build it by the sea.

 6. Taking care of cities.

    Every city has a band of citizens.  The number of citizens
    depends on the city's population.  When you click on a city, you
    can see how the farmland around the city is being used.  You can
    assign your citizens to the farmland, or they can be scientists,
    entertainers or taxmen.  Especially at the start of the game,
    care should be taken to ensure that the citizens are employed so
    that they maximise growth, trade and production.

    If too much food is being generated, a citizen can be taken off
    the farmland by clicking on the occupied farmland square.  This
    citizen can then be transferred to the other duties mentioned
    previously.

    If you move all of your citizens into the city and right-click
    on the central tile of the farmland, the citizens will be
    rearranged to maximise food production.
%% Probably some other AI maximisation choice now  --dwp

    The golden rule of taking care of a city is that there should be
    at least as many happy citizens as unhappy citizens.  A city
    where this is not so is labeled with a lightning bolt.  Take
    care not to let this happen to any of your cities, as unhappy
    cities produce nothing, and will soon revolt.

 7. Explore the world.

    After you have fortified your cities with troops, build Triremes
    in the cities near the sea.  Use the Triremes to map the world
    in search of opponents and new lands.  If you are on an island,
    you should spend less on military and more on expansion.  Or if
    you are located close to an opponent, it is truly a good idea to
    make a peace treaty and share the advances you have made.
    Diplomat units are very useful here, and WILL pay off later.

 8. Things to keep in mind.

    - What the next advance you'll need is.

    - What your luxury, tax and research rates are currently set to.

    - Treaty are often broken, so don't neglect defence...

    - Some wonders can be made obsolete by the development of
      certain advances.

 9. Make your own strategy for the game.

    These basic concepts will allow you to play the game pretty
    well, especially in the beginning of the game.  But to improve,
    you need to study the various units and advances, and PRACTICE,
    PRACTICE, PRACTICE!  Freeciv has many twists, so if you haven't
    played a similar game before, try consulting the Freeciv WWW
    pages at http://www.freeciv.org
    You'll find more tips for playing, and details of how to contact
    other players.

 10. Interacting with other players (Diplomacy).

    Humans and AI differ in many ways, but the most significant is
    the additional diplomacy that you can take part in with other
    humans - and no, we are not talking about using spies and
    diplomats to incite and steal.

    If you have established an embassy with another human player,
    then you can arrange a diplomatic meeting. This is done by
    going to the `Game' menu, selecting players and clicking on
    the player with whom you wish to meet.  If you actually have
    an embassy (denoted by an X) and the other player is connected
    then a diplomacy menu will pop up.

    In this menu you can choose to:

       - Trade Maps (Sea or entire map),

       - Trade advances,

       - Trade Cities,

       - and Give Gold.

     There is no need to trade like for like, by trading say,
     an advance or city for gold - you can can consider this
     buying and selling.

     A couple of notes:

       - You can't give away your capital.

       - If you can't see a city on your map, then you can't
         request it.

     Of course, the owner of that city can still give it to
     you, in which case the area around the city is shown
     on your map.  One important thing to note, any units
     in the field and supported by that city are also transfered
     (but not those sitting in other cities).  So make sure the
     other player isn't getting a better deal than you expect.


---
#City Improvements
City improvements are built in each of your cities to improve trade
revenue, science production, etc.  Each improvement requires you to
pay an upkeep every turn.  If you can't afford the upkeep for a
building, then it'll be automatically sold.
%% Hmm, "sold" as in "you get money for it", or is it actually lost?
%% Does the player get any money back for it, as when they actually
%% sell an improvement, or is it lost forever?  If it's lost, then
%% "automatically sold" should be "lost".
%%  --> It's sold for money.  See pay_for_buildings() in cityturn.c.
---
@START_IMPROVEMENTS
# Airport
Allows a city to produce veteran air units.  Also, damaged air units
which stay in town for one full turn without moving are completely
restored.

Two cities with Airports can airlift one unit per turn.
Airlifting instantly transports the unit from one city to another
and will use all of the unit's MP.  A unit must have some MP left
to be airlifted.
---
# Aqueduct
%% Allows a city to grow larger than size 8.  (A Sewer system is also
%% required for a city to grow larger than size 12.)
---
# Bank
Together with the Marketplace improvement, a Bank increases the
luxury and tax production within a city by 100%.
---
# Barracks
With a Barracks, each new land unit built in a city will
automatically have Veteran status, which means that its attack and
defence strengths are increased by 50%.  Also, damaged land units
which stay in town for one full turn without moving are completely
restored.

%%Note that discovering Gunpowder and Combustion will obsolete any
%%existing Barracks.
%%
Variant 1: Affects all units, not just land units.
---
# Barracks II
With a Barracks, each new land unit built in a city will
automatically have Veteran status, which means that its attack and
defence strengths are increased by 50%.  Also, damaged land units
which stay in town for one turn are completely restored.

%%The discovery of Combustion will make Barracks II obsolete.
%%
Variant: Uses Barracks variant (see Barracks).
---
# Barracks III
With a Barracks, each new land unit built in a city will
automatically have Veteran status, which means that its attack and
defence strengths are increased by 50%.  Also, damaged land units
which stay in town for one turn are completely restored.

Variant: Uses Barracks variant (see Barracks).
---
# Capitalization
This is not a normal improvement.  Instead, setting a city's
production to Capitalization means its shield production is
converted to tax production (money).
---
# Cathedral
A Cathedral makes 3 unhappy citizens content in a city, making it
easier to maintain order in that city.
---
# City Walls
City Walls make it easier to defend a city.  They triple the defence
strength of units within the city against ground and helicopter
units.  They are ineffective against airborne and sea units as well
as Howitzers.  City Walls also prevent the loss of population which
occurs when a defending unit is destroyed by a land unit.

Variant 1: Also effective against sea units.
---
# Coastal Defense
Increases the defence strength of units within a city by a factor
of 2 when defending against bombardments from enemy ships.
---
# Colosseum
Entertains the citizens of a city, making 3 unhappy citizens
content.
%% Increased by 1 upon the discovery of Electricity.
---
# Courthouse
Reduces the corruption in a city by 50%.  Under a Democracy, a
Courthouse makes 1 unhappy citizen content.
Also halves the effective distance to the capital, for the purpose
of calculating revolt cost.
---
# Factory
Increases the shield production in a city by 50%.  Also contributes
to pollution.
---
# Granary
If a city has a Granary, then when it grows or shrinks, the amount
of stored food will be set to half full.  This helps a city to grow
faster, and withstand famine more easily.
%% In Civ2, city size reduction does not generate food like this.
%% Dare I ask where this food comes from?? :-)
---
# Harbour
Gives one extra food resource on all Ocean squares.  The city needs
to be coastal to build this improvement.
---
# Hydro Plant
Reduces the amount of pollution generated in a city.  It also
increases the shield production of a Factory or Mfg. Plant in the
city: a Factory and a Hydro Plant together give a 75% production
bonus, and a Factory, Mfg. Plant and Hydro Plant together give
a 150% production bonus.
%% For Civ1 the first number should be 100%, but the above
%% describes current freeciv rules.

A city can only have one Hydro Plant, Power Plant, or Nuclear
Plant.  A city can only build a Hydro Plant if it is next to (or
on) a Mountain or River tile.
---
# Library
Increases the science production in a city by 50%.
---
# Marketplace
Increases the luxury and tax production in a city by 50%.
---
# Mass Transit
Neutralises the pollution generated by the population.
The population simply has no effect on the pollution generated in
the city.
---
# Mfg. Plant
Together with a Factory, a Manufacturing Plant increases the shield
production in a city by 100%.
---
# Nuclear Plant
Reduces the amount of pollution generated in a city.  It also
increases the shield production of a Factory or Mfg. Plant in
the city: a Factory and a Nuclear Plant together give a 75%
production bonus, and a Factory, Mfg. Plant and Nuclear Plant
together give a 150% production bonus.
%% For Civ1 the first number should be 100%, but the above
%% describes current freeciv rules.
%% There would also be a change of meltdown during civil disorder,
%% but that hasn't been implemented yet.

A city can only have one Hydro Plant, or a Power Plant, or a
Nuclear Plant.
---
# Offshore Platform
Adds 1 extra shield resource on all Ocean squares in a city.  The
city needs to be coastal to build this improvement.
---
# Palace
Makes a city the capital and the centre of your government.
Corruption in other cities is related to how far away from the
capital they are, except when the government is Democracy or
Communism.  The cost of inciting a revolt in a city also depends
upon the city's distance from the capital (under all forms of
government).

Take good care of your capital, as it's loss may result in your
empire plunging into civil war.
---
# Police Station
Reduces the unhappiness caused by military units outside the city
by 2 under Democracy and 1 under Republic.  This improvement has no
effect under other governments.

Variant: Has the same variant and effect as Women's Suffrage (see
also), but only for the city where it is built.
---
# Port Facility
Allows a city to build veteran sea units.  Also, damaged sea units
which stay in town for one full turn without moving are completely
restored.
---
# Power Plant
Increases the shield production of a Factory or Mfg. Plant in a
city: a Factory and a Power Plant together give a 75% production
bonus, and a Factory, Mfg. Plant and Power Plant together give
a 150% production bonus.  The extra production may lead to the city
generating more pollution.
%% For Civ1 the first number should be 100%, but the above
%% describes current freeciv rules.

A city can only have one Hydro Plant, or a Power Plant, or
a Nuclear Plant.
---
# Recycling Center
Building a recycling centre reduces the amount of pollution
generated by a city by 65%.
---
# Research Lab
Together with a Library and a University, a Research Lab increases
the science production of a city by 150%.
---
# SAM Battery
Doubles the defense of all units inside the city when attacked by
non-nuclear air units.
---
# SDI Defense
Protects a city from attacks from Nuclear units.  Nuclear attacks
simply have no effect on the city.  Also, doubles defence against
non-nuclear missiles.
---
# Sewer System
%% Allows a city to grow beyond size 12.
---
# Solar Plant
This improvement has not been implemented.
---
# Space Component
Space Components can be differentiated into Propulsion and Fuel
Components.  Each pair of them reduces your spaceship's travel
time.  You can build up to 8 pairs.

Before you can build any spaceship parts, the Apollo Program wonder
must have been built by any player.
---
# Space Module
Space Modules are the most expensive parts of spaceships.  There
are three different types of Space Module:

- Habitation Module: provides living space for 10,000 people.

- Life Support Module: provides food and water for the population of
  one Habitation Module.

- Solar Panels: provides the energy needed for any two of the other
  Modules.

You can build up to 4 Space Modules of each kind.

Before you can build any spaceship parts, the Apollo Program wonder
must have been built by any player.
---
# Space Structural
Space Structurals form the base of your spaceship.  All other
spaceship parts need to be connected to Structurals in order to
function. You can build up to 32 Space Structurals.

Before you can build any spaceship parts, the Apollo Program wonder
must have been built by any player.
---
# Stock Exchange
Together with a Marketplace and a Bank, a Stock Exchange boosts
tax and luxury production in a city by 150%.
---
# Super Highways
Increases trade resources by 50% on all squares with roads or
railroads.
---
# Supermarket
Increases the food resources by 50% on each irrigated square which
is being used around the city.
---
# Temple
Makes one unhappy citizen content.  Both the Mysticism advance
and the Oracle wonder double this effect.  With both Mysticism
and the Oracle, 4 citizens are made content.
---
# University
Together with a Library, a University increases the science
production of a city by 100%.
---
@END_IMPROVEMENTS
#Technology
Research into technology is a necessity for improving the ability of
your civilization to develop new military units and city
improvements.
---
@START_TECHS
# Advanced Flight
---
# Alphabet
---
# Amphibious Warfare
---
# Astronomy
---
# Atomic Theory
---
# Automobile
---
# Banking
---
# Bridge Building
Allows Settlers to build roads on river squares.
---
# Bronze Working
---
# Ceremonial Burial
---
# Chemistry
---
# Chivalry
---
# Code of Laws
---
# Combined Arms
---
# Combustion
---
# Communism
Allows changing government to Communism.
---
# Computers
---
# Conscription
---
# Construction
Allows Settlers to build fortresses.
---
# The Corporation
---
# Currency
---
# Democracy
Allows changing government to Democracy.
---
# Economics
---
# Electricity
---
# Electronics
---
# Engineering
---
# Environmentalism
---
# Espionage
---
# Explosives
---
# Feudalism
---
# Flight
---
# Fundamentalism
Allows changing government to Fundamentalism (not implemented).
---
# Fusion Power
---
# Genetic Engineering
---
# Guerilla Warfare
---
# Gunpowder
---
# Horseback Riding
---
# Industrialization
---
# Invention
---
# Iron Working
---
# Labor Union
---
# Laser
---
# Leadership
---
# Literacy
---
# Machine Tools
---
# Magnetism
---
# Map Making
---
# Masonry
---
# Mass Production
---
# Mathematics
---
# Medicine
---
# Metallurgy
---
# Miniaturization
---
# Mobile Warfare
---
# Monarchy
Allows changing government to Monarchy.
---
# Monotheism
---
# Mysticism
---
# Navigation
---
# Nuclear Fission
---
# Nuclear Power
%% Gives sea units one extra move.
---
# Philosophy
%% The first player to research Philosophy gets an immediate advance.
---
# Physics
---
# Plastics
---
# Polytheism
---
# Pottery
---
# Radio
---
# Railroad
Allows Settlers to upgrade roads to railroads.
---
# Recycling
---
# Refining
---
# Refrigeration
---
# Religion
%% Civ1
---
# The Republic
Allows changing government to Republic.
---
# Robotics
---
# Rocketry
---
# Sanitation
---
# Seafaring
---
# Space Flight
---
# Stealth
---
# Steam Engine
---
# Steel
---
# Superconductors
---
# Tactics
---
# Theology
---
# Theory of Gravity
---
# Trade
---
# University
---
# Warrior Code
---
# The Wheel
---
# Writing
---
@END_TECHS
#Wonders of the World
Each wonder has specific benefits for your civilization.
Each wonder is unique and is placed in the city which
constructed it.
---
@START_WONDERS
# A.Smith's Trading Co.
City improvements which would normally have an upkeep of 1 are free
of upkeep, for all cities.
---
# Apollo Program
All cities on the map become visible.
---
# Colossus
Each square around the city where this wonder is built produces one
extra trade resource.
---
# Copernicus' Observatory
Boosts science production by 50% in the city where it is built.
---
# Cure For Cancer
Makes one unhappy citizen content in all cities.
---
# Darwin's Voyage
Gives two immediate technology advances.
---
# Eiffel Tower
This wonder has not been implemented.
---
# Great Library
The civilization which builds the Great Library gets every advance
that at least two other civilizations have achieved.
---
# Great Wall
Works as a City Wall in all cities.
---
# Hanging Gardens
Makes one unhappy or content citizen happy in every city.
Makes 2 extra happy faces in the city containing the Hanging
Gardens (for a total of 3).
---
# Hoover Dam
Works as if you had a Hydro Plant in every city.  (This reduces
pollution and increases the effects of Factories and Mfg. Plants.)
Like a Hydro Plant, the Hoover Dam can only be built in a city
which is next to (or on) a Mountain or River tile.

Variant 1: As above, but works only on the same continent as the
city where it is built.
---
# Isaac Newton's College
Boosts science production by 100% in the city where it is built.
---
# J.S. Bach's Cathedral
Makes two unhappy citizens content in every city.

Variant 1: As above, but works only on the same continent as the
city where it is built.
---
# King Richard's Crusade
Adds one extra shield resource on every square around the city
where it is built.
---
# Leonardo's Workshop
Upgrades one obsolete unit per game turn.
---
# Lighthouse
Gives all sea units 1 additional movement point and eliminates the
risk of losing Triremes on the high seas.  Makes all new sea units
veterans (for all cities).
---
# Magellan's Expedition
Gives all sea units 2 additional movement points.

Variant 1: Only gives 1 additional movement point.
---
# Manhattan Project
%%Allow all players with knowledge of Rocketry to build Nuclear units.
---
# Marco Polo's Embassy
This wonder has not been implemented.
---
# Michelangelo's Chapel
Counts as having a Cathedral in each of your cities.
This makes 3 unhappy citizens content in each city.
%%The discovery of Communism will reduce this effect by 1.
%%The discovery of Theology will increase this effect by 1.)
---
# Oracle
Doubles the effect of Temples, in all cities.
---
# Pyramids
Counts as having a Granary in every city.

Variant 1: Allows you to choose any Government type without the
transition period of Anarchy.
---
# SETI Program
Boosts science production in each city by 50%.  (Counts as having
a Research Lab in all of your cities.)
---
# Shakespeare's Theatre
Makes all unhappy citizens content, in the city where it is located.
---
# Statue of Liberty
Allows you to choose any government without the transition period of
Anarchy.
---
# Sun Tzu's War Academy
All your new ground units become veterans (for all cities).
The chance of a unit becoming a veteran after a battle increases
from 50% to 100%

Variant: Uses Barracks variant (see Barracks).
---
# United Nations
Units regain one extra hitpoint per turn.

Variant 1: Allows you to choose any Government type without the
transition period of Anarchy.
%% This doesn't match Civ1 or Civ2, but diplomatic effects are
%% not very effective in multiplayer, and hitpoints effects don't
%% apply for Civ1.  Note in Civ1 Pyramids have a gov-change effect,
%% but become obsolete, and the Statue of Liberty does not exist.
---
# Women's Suffrage
Counts as a Police Station in every city.  (That is, for each city,
reduces unhappiness for military units outside the city by 2 under
Democracy and 1 under Republic.  This wonder has no effect under
other governments.)

Variant 1: The unhappiness effect of every unit (not just one unit
per city) is reduced by 1.  This means that in a Republic, units do
not cause unhappiness, and in a Democracy, aggressive units cause
only 1 unhappy citizen each.
---
@END_WONDERS
#Units
Units can be used for three purposes: attack, defense, and
reconnaissance.  How useful a particular unit is for each of these
roles depends on the unit's strength in attack and defense, and its
ability to move.

There are four general types of unit: Land, Sea, Air, and
Helicopter.  (Helicopters are sufficiently different from other air
units that it is easiest to think of them as a separate unit type.)

Land units move on land, and suffer the movement effects of terrain,
but benefit from roads and railroads.  They cannot move on ocean
squares except when carried by an appropriate sea unit.  When at
sea, they cannot attack or defend for themselves, but rely on the
sea unit carrying them.  Land units are the only units subject to
zones of control.  On land, land units can fortify to get a 50%
defensive bonus; land units in cities automatically get this bonus,
whether fortified or not.  When a land unit successfully attacks a
city without City Walls, the city is reduced by one population
point.  Land units with zero attack strength are non-military units:
they require no upkeep, have no happiness effects, and cannot attack
enemy units or capture enemy cities.

Sea units move on Ocean squares and into cities next to Ocean
squares.  They can only be built by such cities.  The movement rate
of sea units is affected by several wonders (Lighthouse, Magellan's
Expedition) and by the advance of Nuclear Power.  Most sea units can
attack units on the coast and in coastal cities, but they cannot
enter an enemy city to capture it, even if the city is undefended.

Air units can move on any square not occupied by an enemy unit or
enemy city.  The movement rate of air units is not affected by loss
of hitpoints.  Air units require fuel, which is obtained by ending
their turn in a friendly city or Carrier (or a Submarine for missile
units).  The number of turns an air unit can last without fuel
varies by the unit type (see the individual units).  Like sea units,
air units are unable to enter an empty enemy city to capture it.
When outside cities, air units can only be attacked by Fighters (or
Stealth Fighters).  Air units cannot be used to explore villages.

Like air units, Helicopters can move on any square not occupied by
an enemy unit or enemy city, and their movement rate is not affected
by loss of hitpoints.  Helicopters do not require fuel, but they
lose a small amount of health for every turn not spent in a city,
unless you have the United Nations wonder.  Unlike other air units,
Helicopters can capture enemy cities.

Units which have been damaged in combat will regain hit points each
turn in which they are not moved.  Normally, a unit which has not
moved will regain one hit point per turn.  A land unit in a city
with Barracks, or a sea unit in a city with a Port Facility, or
an air unit in a city with an Airport, will regain all lost hit
points if a full turn is spent (without moving) in the city.
Otherwise, a unit which spends a turn in a city regains one third
of its base hit points.  A unit which spends a turn on a fortress
regains an extra one quarter of its base hitpoints.  Units which
are fortified regain an extra hit point.  If a player has the
United Nations wonder, that player's units regain an extra two hit
points per turn, even for units which have moved.  In addition
to all other effects, Helicopters lose two hit points (or gain two
hit points less than they otherwise would) each turn that they do
not end in a city.  Damaged units in Sentry mode will wake up when
they have regained all of their hit points.
---
@START_UNITS
# AEGIS Cruiser
%% Doubles defence against missiles and aircraft.
---
# Alpine Troops
%% Alpine Troops treat all squares as if they have roads.
---
# Archers
---
# Armor
---
# Artillery
---
# Battleship
---
# Bomber
%% If a Bomber is not able to refuel in a city or on a Carrier unit by
%% the end of its second turn, it runs out of fuel and is lost.
---
# Cannon
---
# Caravan
%% Used to establish trade routes and help build wonders.  Caravans
%% ignore the zone of control.
Every Caravan that is used to build a wonder will add 50 shields
towards the production of the wonder.

TIP: A well-known strategy is to build wonders in one turn, by
     stockpiling a stack of Caravans, then bringing them all
     into the city where the wonder is to be built.
---
# Caravel
%% This unit can convey up to 3 land-based units across water.
---
# Carrier
%% The Carrier can carry up to 8 airborne units.
%%
TIP: Guard Carriers with a handful of fast-moving ships and a
     battleship, as losing a fully-equipped Carrier is VERY
     painful and expensive.
---
# Catapult
---
# Cavalry
---
# Chariot
---
# Cruise Missile
%% If a Cruise Missile is unable to end its turn in a city or on a
%% Carrier or Submarine unit, it runs out of fuel and is lost.
%%
TIP: A handful of these can successfully keep the waters around
     your treasured homeland free of enemy ships.
---
# Cruiser
---
# Crusaders
This unit has not been implemented.
---
# Destroyer
TIP: A very fast unit, which is very useful for hunting down enemy
     Transports.
---
# Diplomat
 - A Diplomat can establish embassies with other civilizations
   by moving into another player's city.

 - Diplomats can also try to sabotage enemy production, or steal
   an advance from an enemy city.  (An advance can only be stolen
   once per city).

 - A Diplomat can also bribe an enemy unit, if that unit is the only
   one on its square.

 - Diplomats can even start a revolution in an enemy city and turn
   it into your own, if you have the money!
%%
%%  - Diplomats ignore the zone of control.
%% %% Should include entry for zoc, and a cross-reference here.

 - In some game strategies, hordes of Diplomats can be used to wreak
   havoc on the enemy.  Little wonder that Diplomats are often
   viewed with suspicion and fear!
---
# Dragoons
---
# Elephants
We've chosen not to implement these fierce animals.
---
# Engineers
Engineers are similar to Settlers, but they work twice as fast and
move twice as fast.  Engineers may also perform major terrain
transformations (for example, converting Tundra into Desert) which
are beyond the capabilities of Settlers.

TIP 1: Upgrade Settlers to Engineers when possible, as Engineers
       require the same resources as ordinary Settlers.

TIP 2: If you manage to build Leonardo's Workshop, research
       Explosives before the Workshop becomes obsolete.  This way,
       your Settler units will be upgraded for free.
---
# Explorer
%% Treats all terrain as if it had roads and ignores any zone of
%% control.
Explorers are very useful for mapping unknown territory.
---
# Fanatics
This unit isn't in the game.
%% They are even fiercer animals than the Elephant!! :-)
---
# Fighter
%% If a Fighter is unable to end its turn in a city or on a Carrier
%% unit, it runs out of fuel and is lost.  Fighters (and Stealth
%% Fighters) are the only units which can attack enemy air units.
---
# Freight
%% Used to establish trade routes, or help build wonders.
The Freight unit replaces the Caravan, and moves at twice the speed.
---
# Frigate
%% This unit can convey up to 2 land-based units across water.
---
# Galleon
%% This unit can convey up to 4 land-based units across water.
---
# Helicopter
The Helicopter is a very powerful unit, as it can both fly and
conquer cities.  Care must be exercised, because Helicopters lose a
small amount of health for every turn not spent in a city, unless
you have the United Nations wonder.
---
# Horsemen
---
# Howitzer
%% This unit ignores the effect of City Walls.
---
# Ironclad
---
# Knights
---
# Legion
---
# Marines
%% Marines can attack enemy cities from sea units on Ocean squares.
---
# Mech. Inf.
Mechanized Infantry; this unit has the strongest defence strength
of any land unit, but is only available near the end of the
technology tree.
---
# Militia
%% A Civ1 unit corresponding to Civ2 Warriors.
This unit may be built from the start of the game.  It is the
weakest unit.
---
# Musketeers
---
# Nuclear
%% If a Nuclear unit is unable to end its turn in a city or on a
%% Carrier or Submarine unit, it runs out of fuel and is lost.
You can build Nuclear units when you have the required advance, and
the Manhattan Project wonder has been built by any player.

On impact, the blast will destroy any unit in a 3x3-square area,
including friendly units.  When striking a city, the city size is
halved, and the surrounding squares are polluted.

TIP 1: Nuking the ocean will not generate pollution, and is a most
       effective (but expensive!!) way of getting rid of enemy
       ships.

TIP 2: You may be involved in a situation where you've invaded an
       enemy country en masse, but the enemy cities are too strong.
       Before using a Nuclear unit, assemble a gang of Settlers
       and/or Engineers next to the city and have them ready to fix
       the pollution on the same turn it occurs!  This minimises the
       chance of global warming.  Eco-friendly nukes!
---
# Paratroopers
Not implemented.  (Considered too powerful?)
---
# Partisan
%% Treats all terrain as if it had roads and ignores any zone of
%% control.
A number of Partisans are granted free when an enemy conquers your
city, but only under these conditions:

 - Guerilla Warfare must be known by at least 1 player.

 - You must be the player who originally built the city.

 - You must know about Communism and Gunpowder.

 - You must run either a Democracy or a Communist government.
---
# Phalanx
---
# Pikemen
%% The defence of these units is doubled if attacked by horseback
%% units (other than Cavalry).
---
# Riflemen
---
# Sail
%% A Civ1 unit corresponding to a Civ2 Caravel.
---
# Settlers
Setters are one of the key units in the game.  They can be used to
found new cities, irrigate land, build roads, railroads, fortresses
and mines, and clean up pollution.  Upkeep for Settlers is in food
rather than production, and a Setter can die if its supporting city
runs out of food.
%% In Civ2, Settlers may require both food and shields for upkeep.

Settlers and Engineers may work together to decrease the amount of
time required for long projects.  If two or more Settlers and/or
Engineers are both working on the same task in the same square,
their efforts will be added together each turn until the task is
finished.  Be careful not to dedicate too many workers to one task,
though; excess effort can be wasted, and a group of Settlers and/or
Engineers is highly vulnerable to enemy attacks.
---
# Spy
A Spy is a full time professional and as such is much more
skilled in the arts of espionage than her Diplomat predecessor.

The most inoffensive skills in a Spy's repertoire are her ability
to investigate cities - revealing detailed information, and
the establishment of embassies.  However, if your Spy has gained
herself a reputation for clandestine behaviour she will be
executed if she tries to establish an embassy.

She can also be used to: poison the water supply of an enemy city
(reducing the population); steal specific technology; and sabotage
predetermined city targets (note: sabotaging improvements in a
capital or sabotaging City Walls increases the risks of capture).
A Spy can also infiltrate a city and ferment a revolt.

A Spy can also be of aid on the battlefield - sabotaging enemy units
as well as bribing them to change allegiance.
---
# Stealth Bomber
An improved Bomber, with improved attack and a higher movement
radius.
---
# Stealth Fighter
An improved Fighter, with improved attack and a higher movement
radius.
---
# Submarine
This unit is invisible unless the enemy is very close.  It cannot
make shore bombardments against enemy land units or cities.
%% It can carry up to 8 missiles.

Submarines have a very high strategic value, but have a weak
defence.
---
# Transport
%% This unit can convey up to 8 land-based units across water.
---
# Trireme
%% This unit can convey up to 2 land-based units across water.
%% Triremes have a 50% risk of being lost at sea unless they end their
%% turn next to a coast or in a port.
---
# Warriors
This unit may be built from the start of the game.  It is the
weakest unit.
---
@END_UNITS
#Combat
%% First draft by Greg Wooledge <wooledge@kellnet.com> 1998-07-30.
When one unit attacks another unit, either the attacker will be
destroyed, or the defender will be destroyed -- never both (unless
the attacker was a missile).  The outcome depends on several
factors, including chance.

First, the attacker's strength is modified.

 - If the attacker is a veteran, its strength is multiplied by 1.5.

 - "Exhausted" attackers are weaker: if the attacker has only 1/3
   movement point left, its strength is divided by 3; if it has 2/3
   movement point, its strength is multiplied by 2/3.  If the
   attacker has 1 or more movement points left, no further
   modifications occur.

Next, the defender's strength is modified.

 - If the defender is a veteran, then its strength is multiplied by
   1.5.

 - Then the defender's strength is multiplied by the defense factor
   of the terrain it occupies.

 - Next, the defender's strength is doubled if it is a Pikeman unit
   defending against horsemen, or if it is an AEGIS Cruiser
   defending against airborne units (including missiles and
   Helicopters).

 - The defender's strength is doubled again if it is in a city with
   a SAM Battery and the attacker is an air unit (other than a
   Helicopter) or a missile.

 - An SDI Defense doubles the defender's strength yet again against
   missile attacks.

 - If the attacker is a ship and the defender is in a city with a
   Coastal Defense, the defender's strength is doubled.

 - Against ground units (other than Howitzers) and Helicopters,
   defending units in a city with City Walls have their strength
   tripled.

 - If the defender is in a fortress (and not a city), its strength
   is doubled.

 - Finally, if the defender is a ground unit, and is either
   fortified or inside a city, its strength is multiplied by 1.5.

If, after these modifications, the attacker has a strength of 0, it
automatically loses.  Otherwise, if the defender has a strength of
0, the defender loses.

After these preliminaries, combat occurs, as long as both units are
still alive (i.e., hit points are greater than 0).  Each round, a
random number between 1 and the sum of the attacker's and defender's
strengths is generated.  If this number is greater than the
defender's strength, the defender loses hit points equal to the
attacker's firepower.  Otherwise, the attacker loses hit points
equal to the defender's firepower (unless the defender is a ship
inside a city, in which case the attacker loses 1 hit point -- ships
in a harbor aren't able to maneuver effectively).  The first unit to
reach 0 hit points (or negative hit points) loses.
%% Actually, that's a little white lie.  The random number is really
%% from 0 to (A+D-1), and the comparison is ">=D", not ">D".  The
%% odds are the same both ways, but I think my explanation may be a
%% little simpler for non-programmers who may be reading this.

Whichever unit survives the fight has a chance of becoming a
veteran, if it was not a veteran already.  If the winner's
civilization has the Sun Tzu's War Academy (and if it isn't
obsolete), the unit will always become a veteran.  Otherwise, the
chance of becoming a veteran is 50%.

If the attacker is a ground unit and wins, and the defender is in a
city without City Walls, the city is reduced in size by 1.

If the defender loses, and is not inside a city or fortress, all
other units at the defender's location are destroyed along with the
defender.
---
# Combat example 1
Suppose a veteran Cannon (A:8, D:1, HP:20, F:1) with 2/3 movement
points left attacks a non-veteran Musketeer (A:3, D:3, HP:20, F:1)
inside a city with City Walls built on a Forest tile.

The attacker's base strength is 8.  Veteran status makes this 12,
but because it only has 2/3 movement points its final strength is 8.

The defender's base strength is 3.  Because it is on a Forest tile,
its strength becomes 4.5.  It is behind City Walls, so its strength
is tripled, to 13.5.  It is a ground unit inside a city, so its
strength is increased to 20.25.

Strength values inside the game are actually multiplied by 10, with
fractions dropped, so the attacker's strength is 80, and the
defender's strength is 202.

Each round of combat, a random number between 1 and 282 is
generated.  If the number is greater than 202 (about a 28% chance),
the defender loses 1 hit point.  Otherwise (about a 72% chance), the
attacker loses 1 point.

%% Double-check my calculations....  Consider 28 rounds of combat.
%% The attacker should win about 8 of them, taking 8 HP off the
%% defender's 20 HP total.  The defender should win the other 20,
%% killing the attacker.
Since both units have 20 hit points, the odds favor a victory for
the defender.  The defender will probably lose somewhere around 40%
of its hit points during the fight.  But the outcome is never
certain as long as both units have non-zero strengths; the defender
might emerge untouched, or it might lose most of its hit points, or
it might even lose the battle.
---
# Combat example 2
Suppose a veteran Battleship (A:12, D:12, HP:40, F:2) with 3
movement points attacks a veteran Alpine Troops (A:5, D:5, HP:20,
F:1) inside a city built on a Grassland tile, with City Walls and a
Coastal Defense.

The attacker's strength is 12, raised to 18 because of veteran
status.

The defender's strength is 5, raised to 7.5 due to veteran status.
The terrain's defense factor is 1 (no effect).  The Coastal Defense
doubles the defender's strength to 15.  The defender is a ground
unit inside a city, so its total strength is 22.5.

Internally, the values used for attacker and defender strength are
180 and 225, respectively.

Each round, a random number from 1 to 405 is generated.  If it is
greater than 225 (about a 44% chance) the defender loses 2 hit
points (the attacker's firepower is 2).  Otherwise, the attacker
loses 1 hit point.

%% Please, someone double-check my probability computations! :-(
%% Consider 22 rounds of combat: the Battleship should win 10 of
%% them, and the Alpine Troops 12.  That's enough to kill the Alpine
%% Troops (precisely to 0 hit points), and inflict 12 hit points on
%% the Battleship's 40 HP total.
In this case, the odds greatly favor the attacker winning.  The
Battleship is 25% less likely to score a hit in any given round,
but when it does, it does twice as much damage to the enemy.  Also,
the Battleship has twice as many hit points.  The Battleship should
expect to lose about 30% of its hit points during the fight... after
which it will still have 2 movement points left.
%% In Civ2, movement points are re-evaluated after a sea unit is
%% damaged in battle, so those 2 MP may vanish!
---
#Zones of Control
Zones of Control, abbreviated as ZOC, is a game concept which
prevents you moving freely in zones controlled (or partially
controlled) by enemy forces.

The general rule is that a land unit which is adjacent to an enemy
occupied square cannot move directly to another square which is
also adjacent to an enemy occupied square.  Here an enemy occupied
square means an enemy city, or an enemy unit on a land square.
Adjacency means any of the eight squares surrounding a unit.

In the following special cases ZOC does not apply:
- A unit moving directly into or out of a city.
- A unit moving onto a square occupied by a friendly unit.
- A unit type which explicitly ignores ZOC, eg Diplomats.

Note:
- Only land units are restricted by ZOC.
- Non-land units can impose ZOC (that is, count as enemy occupied
  squares), but only if they are on a land square.  So effectively
  sea units cannot impose ZOC, and air units (including helicopters)
  do not impose ZOC if they are over sea squares.
- ZOC does not restrict unit attacks, only movement.

TIP: You can infiltrate enemy zones by first moving in a Diplomat
     (or some other unit which ignores ZOC), and then moving regular
     units onto the square now occupied by the Diplomat.
     By repeating this process (and optionally leaving some units
     behind to keep squares occupied), you can make a path through
     enemy territory.

The following Freeciv ZOC effects differ from some similar games:
- Enemy cities with no units in them impose ZOC.
- Land units moving from boats at sea onto land are subject to ZOC.
These cases will probably be changed in a future version of Freeciv.
---
%% Terrain help by Greg Wooledge <wooledge@kellnet.com>.  First
%% draft 1998-07-18.
%% It would probably be better to have some client-side code to
%% automatically pull terrain information from the tile_types[]
%% array, but this is better than nothing.
#Terrain
The different types of terrain each have different strengths and
drawbacks.  When choosing a place for a new city, make sure there
are enough food-producing squares nearby to support your growing
population.

The net benefit of a square for your city depends on your government
type as well as city improvements and wonders.
---
# Arctic
Food: 0.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 2.  Defense: 1.
With Seals, Arctic squares will produce 2 Food.
Arctic squares cannot be irrigated or mined.  They may be
transformed to Tundra by Engineers.
---
# Desert
Food: 0.  Shields: 1.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 1.  Defense: 1.
With an Oasis, Desert squares will produce 3 Food.
Deserts can be mined or irrigated (but not both at the same time).
They may be transformed to Plains by Engineers.
---
# Forest
Food: 1.  Shields: 2.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 2.  Defense: 1.5.
With Game, Forest squares will produce 2 extra Food.
Forests can be irrigated, which converts them to Plains.  Forests
cannot be mined.  They may be transformed to Grassland by Engineers.
---
# Grassland
Food: 2.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 1.  Defense: 1.
With Resources, Grassland squares will produce 1 Shield.
Grasslands can be irrigated.  If mined, Grasslands will be converted
to Forest.  They may be transformed to Hills by Engineers.
---
# Hills
Food: 1.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 2.  Defense: 2.
With Coals, Hills squares will produce 2 Shields.
Hills can be irrigated or mined (but not both at the same time).
They may be transformed to Plains by Engineers.
---
# Jungle
Food: 1.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 2.  Defense: 1.5.
With Gems, Jungle squares will produce 4 Trade.
Jungles can be irrigated, which converts them to Grassland, or
mined, which converts them to Forest.  They may be transformed to
Plains by Engineers.
---
# Mountains
Food: 0.  Shields: 1.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 3.  Defense: 3.
With Gold, Mountain squares will produce 5 Trade.
Mountains can be mined, but not irrigated.  They may be transformed
to Hills by Engineers.
---
# Ocean
Food: 1.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 2.  Movement: boat.  Defense: 1.
With Fish, Ocean squares will produce 2 extra Food.
Only sea units (Triremes and other boats) can travel on the Ocean.
Ocean squares can never be polluted or transformed.
---
# Plains
Food: 1.  Shields: 1.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 1.  Defense: 1.
With Horses, Plains squares will produce 2 extra Food.
Plains can be irrigated.  If mined, Plains will be converted to
Forest.  They may be transformed to Grassland by Engineers.
---
# River
Food: 2.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 1.  Movement: 1(*).  Defense: 1.5.
Units moving from one River square to another River square act as
though there were a road joining them.
With Resources, River squares will produce 1 Shield.
Rivers can be irrigated but not mined or transformed.
Roads and railroads can only be built on River squares if your
civilization has learned Bridge Building technology.
---
# Swamp
Food: 1.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 2.  Defense: 1.5.
With Oil, Swamp squares will produce 4 Shields.
Swamps can be irrigated, which converts them to Grassland, or mined,
which converts them to Forest.  They may be transformed to Plains by
Engineers.
---
# Tundra
Food: 1.  Shields: 0.  Trade: 0.  Movement: 1.  Defense: 1.
With Game, Tundra squares will produce 2 extra Food.
Tundra cannot be irrigated or mined.  It may be transformed to
Desert by Engineers.
%% In Civ2, Tundra can be irrigated (don't know about mining).
---
# Terrain Alterations
Settlers and Engineers have the ability to alter terrain squares in
several ways.

Plains, Grasslands, Deserts and Hills can be irrigated.  This
requires a nearby source of water: an Ocean or River square, or
another square which is irrigated, must be directly adjacent to the
target square, to the north, south, east or west.  Irrigating a
square causes it to produce 1 extra food resource per turn.

Desert, Hills and Mountains can be mined.  Mining a Desert or
Mountain square causes it to produce an extra shield each turn.
Mining a Hills square produces an extra 3 shields each turn.

Roads and railroads can be built on any square except Ocean.  (To
build a road or railroad on a River square, though, you must know
Bridge Building.)  Roads and railroads allow your units to move
more quickly, and they increase the resources produced in cities.

 - Units move three times as quickly as normal when going from one
   square to another, if both squares have a road.

 - Units expend no movement points when moving along a railroad.
   You may ride a railroad indefinitely.

 - A road produces a trade resource on Desert, Grassland and Plains
   squares.

 - A railroad increases the shield resources produced by a square by
   50%.  (Depending on server options, railroads may also increase
   food and trade resources, or may increase shield resources by an
   amount other than 50%.)

Settlers and Engineers may also build a fortress.  Units inside a
fortress defend at twice their normal strength; also, units inside
a fortress must be destroyed one at a time.  See the Combat help
section for further details.
---
%% First draft by Greg Wooledge <wooledge@kellnet.com> 1998-07-23.
#Government
Your government type influences your cities' productivity and
commerce, your citizens' happiness, and many other game factors.

Your civilization starts out under Despotism.  As your technology
improves, you can select other forms of government (listed below).
In order to change your form of government, you must start a
revolution.  This will cause your civilization to undergo a period
of Anarchy (lasting 1-5 turns); at the end of this time, you will be
able to choose your new government.

Corruption is the loss of trade due to inefficiency and greed.
Under most forms of government, the farther away from the capital a
city is, the more trade will be lost to corruption.  (If you do not
have a capital, your cities will suffer extremely high levels of
corruption.)  A Courthouse will reduce the level of corruption in a
city.

TIP 1: Offensive military campaigns are difficult under Republican
       and Democractic governments unless you give your citizens
       lots of luxuries to keep them happy.  When conquering other
       civilizations, it may be helpful to switch to one of the more
       militant styles of government.

TIP 2: Scientific advancement requires high levels of trade, which
       are much easier to achieve under Republican and Democratic
       governments.  Consider switching to the Republic as soon as
       you can; gaining advanced technology early in the game puts
       you at an advantage.
---
# Civil War
Civil war is devastating to any empire, and is triggered by
the loss of your capital (palace).  Up to half of your cities
will rebel and declare allegiance to a new (AI) leader, who
will loot half of your treasury and retain all of your
scientific advances.

Players remain in the civil war state for just one turn, after
which the empire enters a state of anarchy.  

The capture of your capital does not always lead to civil war.  If
you have treated your people with kindness, you are more likely to
retain their loyalty.  Each city that is celebrating reduces the
chance of civil war, while each revolting city increases the 
likelihood.

In addition, the form of government directly contributes to the
chance of civil war.  Governments with universal franchise are
far less likely to revolt than those more despotic in nature.

The number of cities an empire needs before it can erupt into
civil war is by default 10.  That is, empires with fewer than 10
cities are immune from civil war.  However, this is a server
option, and may vary upwards from a minimum of 6.
---
# Anarchy
Anarchy is simply the absence of any recognizable government.
Citizens are disorganized and unproductive, and will spend all
income as quickly as possible, rather than paying taxes or
conducting research.

Anarchy offers slightly less corruption than Despotism, but slightly
more unhappiness.

Settlers consume 1 food per turn under Anarchy.  Squares which would
normally yield more than 2 units of food, shields or trade suffer
a 1-unit penalty (e.g., an irrigated grassland square which would
normally yield 3 food only yields 2 food while you are in Anarchy).

Under Anarchy, each of your cities can support a number of military
units equal to its size without paying shields for upkeep.
(Additional units require 1 production shield each.)

You may impose martial law under Anarchy: each military unit inside
a city will keep one unhappy citizen content.  (Or at least, unhappy
citizens will act content, and will not cause disorder.)
---
# Despotism
Under Despotism, you are the absolute ruler of your people.  Your
control over your citizens is maintained largely by martial law.

Despotism suffers the highest level of corruption of all forms of
government.

Settlers consume 1 food per turn under Despotism.  Squares which
would normally yield more than 2 units of food, shields or trade
suffer a 1-unit penalty (e.g., an irrigated grassland square which
would normally yield 3 food only yields 2 food while you are under
Despotic rule).

Under Despotism, each of your cities can support a number of
military units equal to its size without paying shields for
upkeep.  (Additional units require 1 production shield each.)

You may impose martial law under Despotism: each military unit
inside a city will keep one unhappy citizen content.  (Or at least,
unhappy citizens will act content, and will not cause disorder.)
---
# Monarchy
Under Monarchy, a king or queen serves as a hereditary figurehead
for your government.

Monarchy suffers the same small amount of corruption that the
Republic does.

Settlers consume 1 food per turn under Monarchy.

Under Monarchy, your cities can support up to 3 military units
without paying shields for upkeep.  (Additional units require 1
production shield each.)

You may impose limited martial law under Monarchy: each military
unit in a city, up to a maximum of 3, will keep one unhappy citizen
content.
---
# Communism
A Communist government is based on the ideal that all people are
equal.  All goods are owned by the state, rather than by private
citizens.  Communism gives a balance between military and commercial
styles of government.

Under Communism, corruption does not vary by distance from the
capital; all cities (including the capital) have a modest amount
of corruption.  In addition, Communist cities more than 10 squares
away from the capital are considered to be only 10 squares away when
computing the cost of inciting a revolt (see Units, Diplomat).

Settlers consume 2 food per turn under Communism.

Diplomats and Spies created under Communism are always veterans.

Under Communism, your cities can support up to 3 military units
without paying shields for upkeep.  (Additional units require 1
production shield each.)

You impose limited but efficient martial law under Communism.  Each
military unit inside a city, up to a maximum of 3, will keep 2
unhappy citizens content.
---
# Republic
Under a Republican government, citizens hold an election to select a
representative who will govern them; since elected leaders must
remain popular to remain in control, citizens are given a greater
degree of freedom.  Citizens under the Republic become unhappy
easily, but the self-sufficiency of your citizens allows high levels
of trade.

Cities under the Republic suffer a small amount of corruption.

Settlers consume 2 food per turn under the Republic.  Squares with
at least 1 trade resource get a trade bonus of 1 under the Republic.

Under the Republic, military units require 1 production shield each
for upkeep.  In addition the following units are considered
aggressive units:

 - units with an attack strength greater than 0 which are not
   inside a city or inside a fortress within 3 squares of a friendly
   city

 - air units (including missiles and helicopters) and sea units
   with an attack strength greater than 0, regardless of their
   location

The citizens of a city will tolerate 1 aggressive unit; subsequent
units will generate 1 unhappy citizen each.
---
# Democracy
Under Democracy, citizens govern directly by voting on issues.
Democracy offers the highest possible level of trade, but also
offers the most potential for unhappiness.  There is no corruption
during Democracy, but citizens become very upset during wars.

Settlers consume 2 food per turn under Democracy.  Squares with
at least 1 trade resource get a trade bonus of 1 under Democracy.

Under Democracy, military units require 1 production shield each for
upkeep.  In addition the following units generate unhappiness:

 - Units with an attack strength greater than 0 which are not
   inside a city, or inside a fortress within 3 squares of a
   friendly city, generate 2 unhappy citizens.

 - Air/sea units with an attack strength greater than 0 which are
   inside a city or nearby fortress generate only 1 unhappy citizen.

If a city remains in disorder more than 2 turns under Democratic
rule, the citizens will spontaneously revolt and plunge your
civilization into Anarchy.

Because (happy) citizens of Democracy believe strongly in the
government, their loyalty is unswerving.  Military units of
Democratic civilizations cannot be bribed, and Democratic cities
cannot be incited to revolt by enemy Diplomats and Spies.
---
%% First draft by Greg Wooledge <wooledge@kellnet.com> 1998-07-24.
#Happiness
Keeping your citizens happy (or at least content) is one of the most
important objectives in Freeciv.  When your citizens become unhappy,
your cities will fall into disorder (and produce nothing).  Cities
which are in disorder are easier for enemy Diplomats and Spies to
incite to revolt.  Prolonged disorder under Democracy can lead to a
revolution.

Citizens may be either happy, content or unhappy.  If the number of
unhappy citizens in a city exceeds the number of happy citizens, the
city falls into disorder.  However, if the number of happy citizens
in a city is at least as great as the number of content citizens,
and you have no unhappy citizens, and the city has at least 5
citizens, then the city celebrates.  A celebrating city increases in
population by 1 each turn until there is no excess food or until the
number of happy citizens is no longer sufficient for celebration.

The normal state of a citizen is contentment.  However, as your
cities grow larger, crowding causes citizens to become unhappy.
Each citizen in a city after the 4th will be generated unhappy,
instead of content.  If you have a large number of cities (depending
on your government), the limit on content citizens is reduced to 3.
%% See content_citizens() in server/citytools.c.

In order to offset unhappiness, you may build city improvements and
wonders of the world, or convert a fraction of your trade into
luxuries.  For every 2 luxuries produced in a city, one content
citizen is made happy.  After converting all content citizens to
happy citizens, unhappy citizens are converted to happy and/or
content.  Some city improvements and wonders of the world have
effects on citizens' happiness (see the appropriate sections for
details).

Under certain forms of government, the presence of military units in
a city can either create unhappiness or create contentment (see
Government for details).
---
#Space Race
The Space Race is a second option to win the game, besides 
eliminating all other civilizations.  If your spaceship arrives
first at Alpha Centauri, the game is over and you have won.
(However it is possible for this option to be off as a server 
option.)

Before you can build spaceship parts, the Apollo Program wonder
must have been built by any player.  You also need specific
technologies to build the different spaceship parts: see the
help texts for Space Structural, Space Component, and Space Module,
under City Improvements.  (If there are no help texts for these 
items, it probably means the spacerace server option is off for 
your game.)

When you have started building your spaceship, you can see it with
the "Spaceship" command in the Report menu.  To see spaceships of
other players, select the player in the Players dialog and click
"Spaceship".

If the success probability is below 100%, some fraction of the
people on board may not survive the journey.  This reduces the
score bonus from the spaceship, but it still counts as a win.

If the capital of a civilization is captured, a spaceship that has
been launched will be lost, so defend your capital well!

TIP: If an enemy civilization has launched a spaceship, try to
     quickly build a light spaceship with many propulsion units
     that will arrive earlier.  The only other option is to capture
     their capital.
---
%% This is for XEmacs.  It sets up the indentation.
%% The paragraph-separate thing isn't working right.  Can someone
%% tell me how to set things up so fill-paragraph (M-q) treats
%% lines starting with # and % and - as delimiters of the area to
%% fill?
%% Local Variables:
%% mode: indented-text
%% fill-column: 68
%% paragraph-separate: "^[\t\f%#-]*$"
%% End:
